<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html;charset=utf-8" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
<title>QT4 CG Meeting 100 Minutes 2024-11-26</title>
<meta name="generator" content="Org Mode" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../css/style.css"/>
<link rel="shortcut icon" href="/img/QT4-64.png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="64x64" href="/img/QT4-64.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="76x76" href="/img/QT4-76.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="120x120" href="/img/QT4-120.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="152x152" href="/img/QT4-152.png" type="image/png" />
</head>
<body>
<div id="content" class="content">
<h1 class="title">QT4 CG Meeting 100 Minutes 2024-11-26</h1>
<p>
<a href="../">Meeting index</a> / <a href="https://qt4cg.org">QT4CG.org</a> / <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard">Dashboard</a> / <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues">GH Issues</a> / <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pulls">GH Pull Requests</a>
</p>

<div id="table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<div id="text-table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<ul>
<li><a href="#minutes">Minutes</a></li>
<li><a href="#new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/9]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#administrivia">1. Administrivia</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#roll-call">1.1. Roll call <code>[8/12]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#agenda">1.2. Accept the agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#so-far">1.2.1. Status so far…</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#approve-minutes">1.3. Approve minutes of the previous meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#next-meeting">1.4. Next meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#open-actions">1.5. Review of open action items <code>[1/9]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#open-pull-requests">1.6. Review of open pull requests and issues</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#blocked">1.6.1. Blocked</a></li>
<li><a href="#merge-without-discussion">1.6.2. Merge without discussion</a></li>
<li><a href="#substantive">1.6.3. Substantive PRs</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#technical-agenda">2. Technical agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#pr-1570">2.1. PR #1570: 1550 Replace node-kind() with new type-of() function</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1604">2.2. PR #1604: 1593 Allow `document-node(NameTestUnion)`</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1603">2.3. PR #1603: 1602 Editorial update to "other operations" on maps and arrays</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1599">2.4. PR #1599: 1598 $err:stack-trace: string, please</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1505">2.5. PR #1505: 1503 Add err:map, err:stack-trace, err:additional to XSLT</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1586">2.6. PR #1586: 1527 Move record types into separate sections</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1587">2.7. PR #1587: 557 Add fn:binary-resource</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#any-other-business">3. Any other business</a></li>
<li><a href="#adjourned">4. Adjourned</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-minutes" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="minutes">Minutes</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-minutes">
<p>
Approved <a href="../2024/12-03.html">at meeting 101</a> on 3 December 2024.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-new-actions" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/9]</code></h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-new-actions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-080-07: NW to update the build instructions in the README</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-082-02: DN to work with MK to come to agreement on the fn:ranks proposal</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-088-01: NW to consider how best to add a dedication to MSM.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-088-04: [Someone] needs to update the processing model diagram needs vis-a-vis the static typing feature</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-089-01: CG to draft a PR that attempts to resolve the operators described in #755 to a smaller number of orthogonal choices.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-097-02: MK to make the XSD schema component references into links to XSD</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-097-03: DN to proposal an axis for accessing the siblings of a node.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-098-02: NW to look at the XSL stylesheet for XSD, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/374">#374</a>.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-administrivia" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="administrivia"><span class="section-number-2">1.</span> Administrivia</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-administrivia">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-roll-call" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="roll-call"><span class="section-number-3">1.1.</span> Roll call <code>[8/12]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-roll-call">
<p>
DB, JLO give regrets.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> David J Birnbaum (DB)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Reece Dunn (RD)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Sasha Firsov (SF)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Christian Grün (CG)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Joel Kalvesmaki (JK) [:05-]</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Michael Kay (MK)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Juri Leino (JLO)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> John Lumley (JWL)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Dimitre Novatchev (DN)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Wendell Piez (WP)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Ed Porter (EP)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Norm Tovey-Walsh (NW). <i>Scribe</i>. <i>Chair</i>.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-agenda" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="agenda"><span class="section-number-3">1.2.</span> Accept the agenda</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-agenda">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../agenda/2024/11-26.html">the agenda</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-so-far" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="so-far"><span class="section-number-4">1.2.1.</span> Status so far…</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-so-far">
<p>
These charts have been adjusted so they reflect the preceding six months of work.
</p>


<div id="org503a8a1" class="figure">
<p><img src="./issues-open-2024-11-26.png" alt="issues-open-2024-11-26.png" />
</p>
<p><span class="figure-number">Figure 1: </span>“Burn down” chart on open issues</p>
</div>


<div id="orge4dad06" class="figure">
<p><img src="./issues-by-spec-2024-11-26.png" alt="issues-by-spec-2024-11-26.png" />
</p>
<p><span class="figure-number">Figure 2: </span>Open issues by specification</p>
</div>


<div id="org9d312b5" class="figure">
<p><img src="./issues-by-type-2024-11-26.png" alt="issues-by-type-2024-11-26.png" />
</p>
<p><span class="figure-number">Figure 3: </span>Open issues by type</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-approve-minutes" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="approve-minutes"><span class="section-number-3">1.3.</span> Approve minutes of the previous meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-approve-minutes">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../minutes/2024/11-19.html">the minutes of the previous meeting</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-next-meeting" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="next-meeting"><span class="section-number-3">1.4.</span> Next meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-next-meeting">
<p>
This next meeting is planned for 3 December.
</p>

<p>
CG gives regrets.
</p>

<p>
The CG does not plan to meet on 24 or 31 December.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-open-actions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="open-actions"><span class="section-number-3">1.5.</span> Review of open action items <code>[1/9]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-open-actions">
<p>
(Items marked [X] are believed to have been closed via email before
this agenda was posted.)
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-080-07: NW to update the build instructions in the README</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-082-02: DN to work with MK to come to agreement on the fn:ranks proposal</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-088-01: NW to consider how best to add a dedication to MSM.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-088-04: [Someone] needs to update the processing model diagram needs vis-a-vis the static typing feature</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-089-01: CG to draft a PR that attempts to resolve the operators described in #755 to a smaller number of orthogonal choices.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-097-02: MK to make the XSD schema component references into links to XSD</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-097-03: DN to proposal an axis for accessing the siblings of a node.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-098-02: NW to look at the XSL stylesheet for XSD, <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/374">#374</a>.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-099-01: MK to add a default layout option for elements-to-map.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK looked and decided that it doesn’t work. Came up with a different idea to
disable some options.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-open-pull-requests" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="open-pull-requests"><span class="section-number-3">1.6.</span> Review of open pull requests and issues</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-open-pull-requests">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-blocked" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="blocked"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.1.</span> Blocked</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-blocked">
<p>
The following PRs are open but have merge conflicts or comments which
suggest they aren’t ready for action.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1596">#1596</a>: 1592 Rework rules for selecting a layout</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1296">#1296</a>: 982 Rewrite of scan-left and scan-right</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1283">#1283</a>: 77b Update expressions</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1062">#1062</a>: 150bis revised proposal for fn:ranks</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-merge-without-discussion" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="merge-without-discussion"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.2.</span> Merge without discussion</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-merge-without-discussion">
<p>
The following PRs are editorial, small, or otherwise appeared to be
uncontroversial when the agenda was prepared. The chairs propose that
these can be merged without discussion. If you think discussion is
necessary, please say so.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1607">#1607</a>: 1590 Drop draft current-mode function from catalog</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1601">#1601</a>: 1516(B) Fix problems with testing examples</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1600">#1600</a>: 1594 typos: dependant and repeated word</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1597">#1597</a>: 1595 Editorial</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Merge these PRs without discussion.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-substantive" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="substantive"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.3.</span> Substantive PRs</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-substantive">
<p>
The following substantive PRs were open when this agenda was prepared.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1604">#1604</a>: 1593 Allow `document-node(NameTestUnion)`</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1603">#1603</a>: 1602 Editorial update to "other operations" on maps and arrays</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1599">#1599</a>: 1598 $err:stack-trace: string, please</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1505">#1505</a>: 1503 Add err:map, err:stack-trace, err:additional to XSLT</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1587">#1587</a>: 557 Add fn:binary-resource</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1586">#1586</a>: 1527 Move record types into separate sections</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1570">#1570</a>: 1550 Replace node-kind() with new type-of() function</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-technical-agenda" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="technical-agenda"><span class="section-number-2">2.</span> Technical agenda</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-technical-agenda">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1570" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-1570"><span class="section-number-3">2.1.</span> PR #1570: 1550 Replace node-kind() with new type-of() function</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-1570">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1570">#1570</a>.
</p>

<p>
MK introduces the PR. 
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: After discussion, decided to add <code>type-of()</code> which does more than <code>node-kind()</code>.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… MK reviews the prose of the PR …</li>
<li>… We walk up the type hierarchy to the first non-anonymous type</li>
</ul></li>
<li>JWL: Isn’t a sequence of strings better than a union? You might have to re-tokenize.</li>
<li>MK: Maybe.</li>
<li>NW: What about a case when there’s a different binding for <code>xs:</code>?</li>
<li>MK: I don’t have a very clear picture of what the use cases are for this function.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… My use cases are diagnostic, so it’s just for human readability.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>CG: I like it, simple strings are what users want, I think. If you want to do
more sophisticated things, write your own function.</li>
<li>RD: In terms of possible uses: within my XQuery plugin, I’m doing a similar
sort of logic when determing the types of a value in things like query result
output, profiling, debugging, etc.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1604" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-1604"><span class="section-number-3">2.2.</span> PR #1604: 1593 Allow `document-node(NameTestUnion)`</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-1604">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1604">#1604</a>
</p>

<p>
MK introduces the PR: this is a bit of syntactic sugar designed to encourage
people to say when a well-formed document node is expected.’
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: We allow <code>NameTestUnion</code> in a <code>DocumentTest</code>
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Have clarified the text with respect to <code>document-node(E)</code>.</li>
<li>… <code>document(NTU)</code> is a shorthand for <code>document(element(NTU))</code>.</li>
<li>… So <code>document(*)</code> is a well-formed XML document.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: It’s expanded in the subtyping rules.</li>
<li>NW: What about whitespace text nodes?</li>
<li>MK: The standard rules for generating an infoset when parsing won’t give you
any whitespace there.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… You could programmatically construct them that way; the spec was a little
bit ambiguous.</li>
<li>… I sort of looked for all the evidence I could find and decided that the
intention was that they aren’t allowed.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: I’ve used the new syntax in Functions and Operators.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1603" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-1603"><span class="section-number-3">2.3.</span> PR #1603: 1602 Editorial update to "other operations" on maps and arrays</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-1603">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1603">#1603</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: This is purely editorial; I found some text that was a mess.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Both maps and arrays have a section called “other operations”. I’ve
updated them both.</li>
<li>… For maps it’s a summary of things you can do with maps other than apply
functions to them.</li>
<li>… For arrays, we had two almost identical sections with odd headings.</li>
<li>… Rewrote the section to say something useful.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1599" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-1599"><span class="section-number-3">2.4.</span> PR #1599: 1598 $err:stack-trace: string, please</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-1599">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1599">#1599</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>CG: This is pretty small. We’ve talked about it several times.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… I’d like to change the type of the <code>$err:stack-trace</code> from function to
string so that it’s easier to serialize.</li>
<li>… The CG should be able to provide a lazy string if it takes too much time
to materialize.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: I think you’re probably right.</li>
<li>RD: What effect would this have on compatibility. If someone wanted to call
this across different implementations. Wouldn’t they have to do
implementation-specific things for the stack trace.</li>
<li>CG: The stack tracke string is entirely implementation defined.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of the return type.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I think we should prescribe a string or nothing. If you want to parse it,
you’ll have to know what product you’re dealing with.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1505" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-1505"><span class="section-number-3">2.5.</span> PR #1505: 1503 Add err:map, err:stack-trace, err:additional to XSLT</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-1505">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1505">#1505</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I think we can accept this contingent on making the equivalent change.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… MK walks through the prose of the PR; it brings XSLT in line with the
XPath changes.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>

<p>
MK to make the corresponding change to <code>$err:stack-trace</code> and then merge the PR.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1586" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-1586"><span class="section-number-3">2.6.</span> PR #1586: 1527 Move record types into separate sections</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-1586">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1586">#1586</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: This is also primarily editorial. I also picked up the change to add a
named record type for key-value pairs. It was a separate issue but in the same
general area.</li>
</ul>

<p>
MK reviews how the material is presented.
</p>

<p>
This PR involves stylesheet changes so it’s not usefully presented in the
formatted PR. We’re looking at a local build on MK’s machine.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: The <code>map:pairs()</code> function now has a link to the <code>key-value-pair</code> record
type in a free-standing section.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… There’s a bit of a consistency issue regarding which are extensible and
which aren’t.</li>
<li>… Generally on input we want to accept additional properties and ignore
them.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: There are about 5 record types now.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… I’ve anticipated putting them in the fn: namespace and adding them to the
static context.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>RD: Do we have the declare item type syntax standardized?</li>
<li>MK: Declare record is standardized in XQuery</li>
<li>RD: Should we also have a signature for those?</li>
<li>MK: If we put them as implicitly declared records, you also get a constructor
function for them. So <code>fn:key-value-pair</code> duplicates the <code>map:pair</code> function.</li>
<li>RD: Should we make the record type with that implicit constructor?</li>
<li>MK: I think it’s logical to have the record and the constructor function
having the same name.</li>
<li>RD: What I mean is replace <code>map:pair</code> with the <code>map-pair</code> record type.</li>
<li>MK: Yes, I think that’s where this leads.</li>
<li>CG: Could it just be <code>pair</code>? Do we have other pairs?</li>
<li>MK: That’s an open question. Currently, we use the name <code>pair</code> qualified by
<code>map:</code>. If we called the record type <code>map-pair</code>, I think we’d have enough
context for it.</li>
<li>JWL: I’m in favor of using <code>key-value-pair</code>, not just <code>pair</code> or <code>map-pair</code>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1587" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-1587"><span class="section-number-3">2.7.</span> PR #1587: 557 Add fn:binary-resource</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-1587">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1587">#1587</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: This is a bit related to what we do about the EXPath file and binary modules.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… This allows us to read a binary resource.</li>
<li>… (The PR also tidies up a lot of things about base URIs in the static and
dynamic contexts.)</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: There’s a big question about what we call this function.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: … The function is completely straightforward.</li>
<li>MK: … Wait, the paragraph about mapping to URIs is wrong.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: There needs to be a parallel change about binary resources. Unfinished business.</li>
<li>JWL: The result type doesn’t have an option on it, but the rules say it could be.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Are we going to try to get an output method to output a binary resource?</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: That gets to the thorny question of functions with side effects.</li>
<li>JWL: No, I mean as part of the serialization.</li>
<li>NW: I think JWL is only proposing that we need a <code>binary</code> output method.</li>
<li>CG: The function is marked as deterministic, does that mean it always needs to
return the same result?</li>
<li>MK: Yes, I think I decided to be consistent with the other resource functions.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… I’m not happy about that, but this didn’t seem to be the right place to
change it.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>CG: All the functions in the file module are all non-deterministic, so you can
decide which ones to use.</li>
<li>DN: In the summary of the function it says it returns binary, but it should
say that it returns <code>xs:base64Binary</code> to avoid confusion.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… To me, “resource” means a URL or a URI, not the content. I’d prefer to
have a more exact name like: <code>binary-resource-content</code>.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>NW: I suppose we could go with <code>binary-doc</code> for parallelism?</li>
<li>MK: Maybe, but we tend to think of <code>doc</code> as XML documents.</li>
<li>DN: Is it meaningful to ask what kind of format it is, in the case when it’s an
executable?</li>
<li>MK: It’s a question as to whether this relates in any way to HTTP content types.</li>
<li>DN: Maybe we could have some way of getting more information about the type of
the resource.</li>
<li>JWL: The example we use the EXPath binary specification is things like images.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… There’s typically a MIME type, but you can also sniff.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: From the magic bytes at the start.</li>
<li>RD: I think it would be more useful to have MIME type detection as a separate function.</li>
<li>NW: MIME type detection is just a mapping to filename extensions these days, so less useful.</li>
<li>DN: Binary can be a little bit risky. It has security implications maybe?
Maybe there should be some warning for this. And should there be an additional
parameter for virus checking?
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Maybe in some applications we would not want the function to be deterministic.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: I think that’s a valid point, but determinism is completely orthogonal to
the question of what the resource type is.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… I think the security implications are orthogonal as well. JavaScript is
text and it can do anything it likes.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>JK: I wonder if there are any thoughts about what to do about the file library.</li>
<li>MK: The specification depends totally on assumptions about order of execution
that ends up being thoroughly unsatisfactory from a specification point of
view, but livable from a product perspective.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-any-other-business" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="any-other-business"><span class="section-number-2">3.</span> Any other business</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-any-other-business">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: JWL was working on the binary specification, would you like to show us
some of that?</li>
</ul>

<p>
JWL demos the progress he’s made porting the EXPath Binary specification to the
QT4 workflow.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JK: Nice work!</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-adjourned" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="adjourned"><span class="section-number-2">4.</span> Adjourned</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-adjourned">
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
