:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       8C365E4E-E3D2-44BB-B718-114CAD2EDE5E
:END:
#+title: QT4 CG Meeting 080 Agenda 2024-06-04/05
#+author: Norm Tovey-Walsh
#+filetags: :qt4cg:
#+options: html-style:nil h:6 toc:nil
#+html_head: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
#+html_head: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../css/style.css"/>
#+html_head: <link rel="shortcut icon" href="/img/QT4-64.png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="64x64" href="/img/QT4-64.png" type="image/png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="76x76" href="/img/QT4-76.png" type="image/png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="120x120" href="/img/QT4-120.png" type="image/png" />
#+html_head: <link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="152x152" href="/img/QT4-152.png" type="image/png" />
#+options: author:nil email:nil creator:nil timestamp:nil
#+startup: showall

[[../][Agenda index]] / [[https://qt4cg.org][QT4CG.org]] / [[https://qt4cg.org/dashboard][Dashboard]] / [[https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues][GH Issues]] / [[https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pulls][GH Pull Requests]]

* Agenda
:PROPERTIES:
:unnumbered: t
:CUSTOM_ID: agenda
:END:

This meeting will be a face-to-face meeting hosted by XML Prague in Prague, CZ.
We will meet from 09:00CEST (07:00GMT, 08:00BST, 03:00EDT) to 18:00CEST on
Tuesday 4 June and Wednesday 5 June.

The meeting will be in the room NB 468. This room is in the same building (the
so called "Nová budova"/"New Building") as the main conference sessions. There
are lifts and stairs in front of the cloak room. Use lift to go to the floor 4.
Then use corridor on your right side, room is almost at the end of the corridor.

(We have used this room in past for XSLT and XProc meetings, so it may be
familiar to some of you.)

XML Prague has generously agreed to provide refreshments, including lunch.

At 17:00CEST (15:00GMT, 16:00BST, 11:00EDT) each day, we will attempt to join a
Zoom session /using the usual call-in details/. If anyone unable to attend the
face-to-face joins the call, we’ll attempt to summarize the decisions made
during the day and solicit feedback.

See the [[https://qt4cg.org/meeting/logistics.html][meeting logistics]] page for details about the Zoom session.

* Administrivia
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: administrivia
:END:

** Roll call
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: roll-call
:END:

** Approve the agenda
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: accept-agenda
:END:

** Approve minutes of previous meeting
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: approve-minutes
:END:

Minutes of [[../../minutes/2024/05-28.html][the previous meeting]].

** Next meeting
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: next-meeting
:END:

This meeting is planned for 4-5 June in Prague, CZ. The following meeting is
scheduled for 11 June.

Or do we want to skip a week after the face-to-face?

** Review of open action items [0/6]
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: open-actions
:END:

(Items marked [X] are believed to have been closed via email before
this agenda was posted.)

+ [ ] QT4CG-063-06: MK to consider refactoring the declare item type syntax to something like declare record
+ [ ] QT4CG-077-03: MK to add a note about document order across documents
+ [ ] QT4CG-077-04: MK to review inconsistencies discovered in review of #1117
+ [ ] QT4CG-078-01: MK to make the default for normalize-newlines backwards compatible.
+ [ ] QT4CG-078-02: MK to update the prose of ~transient{}~ to use the word “should”.
+ [ ] QT4CG-079-01: WP to seek expert advice on hashing functions.

* Technical Agenda
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: technical-agenda
:END:

Rather than attempt to construct an agenda in advance, the chairs propose that
we begin the meeting Tuesday by reviewing our status, who is actually attending,
and constructing an appropriate agenda by reviewing the issues, pull requests,
and other sources.

* Any other business
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: any-other-business
:END:
